---
layout: post
title:  "Catching"
date:   2016-07-13 10:00:00 -0600
categories: tutorial
---

This is the first in a series of tutorials designed for newcomers or those who
just might not have known the mechanics of the game.

# Initiating

The first step of catching a Pokémon is finding and challenging one! Pokémon
spawn in the world in different physical locations. Different terrain types
allow different Pokémon types to appear; for example, a grassy area will have
a lot of Pidgeys and Rattatas, while a river may have water-type Pokémon.

When you see a Pokémon appear on your screen, tap it! You&rsquo;ll initiate a
battle and see a message like _A wild **Pidgey** appeared!_
Then you&rsquo;ll see the throwing interface.

## Throwing

Time to throw those Pokéballs, trainer. Swipe the Pokéball up from the bottom of
your screen to toss it at the Pokémon. You&rsquo;ll need decent aim to hit
inside the white circle!

### The Bonus Circle

I&rsquo;ve noticed a lot of trainers don&rsquo;t fully understand how the bonus
circle works while catching. It&rsquo;s the moving, colored circle inside the
outer white circle. As you hold the Pokéball down before throwing, it shrinks, then
goes full size over and over.

Hitting inside this bonus circle and catching the Pokémon will net you extra XP,
depending on how big it is:

  * **Nice Throw** If the circle is large, you&rsquo;ll get a _Nice!_ message
  and an extra 10 XP.
  * **Great Throw** If the circle is smaller than half-sized, you&rsquo;ll get a
  _Great!_ message and an extra 50 XP.
  * **Excellent Throw** If the circle is almost as small as it can be
  (smaller than quarter-sized), you&rsquo;ll get an  _Excellent!_ message and
  an extra 100 XP.

The smaller the bonus circle, the more likely you are to catch the Pokémon
(assuming you land the Pokéball inside it).

The color of the bonus circle also denotes how difficult the Pokémon will be to
catch; from green (easy) to red (difficult).

### Curve Ball

Curve balls are easy to initiate, but hard to land. Press and hold on the
Pokéball, move the ball in a small circle in either direction until the ball
starts to sparkle, then release it! The Pokéball will fly in an arc in the
direction you spun it, so it takes a lot of practice to land. If the Pokémon is
caught, you&rsquo;ll earn an extra 10 XP.

Sometimes you&rsquo;ll get a **Curve Ball** bonus when you didn&rsquo;t mean to.
Just take it and be thankful for the extra XP!

# Catching

Once you&rsquo;ve hit the Pokémon with a Pokéball, it will go inside the ball
and the ball will wiggle around on the ground. If all goes well, the Pokémon
will be caught! But sometimes the Pokémon will break free and require more
throws.

Remember, the smaller the bonus circle, the more likely the Pokémon is
to stay inside the ball, and the more red the bonus circle, the more likely the
Pokémon is to escape.

Once you&rsquo;ve caught the Pokémon, you&rsquo;ll get an overview of XP gained
and a Pokédex screen if it&rsquo;s the first of that Pokémon you&rsquo;ve
caught.
